Hi everybody! I'm Rick Beato! Today's episode of Everything Music is called What Makes This Song Great Episode 2. The song
we'll be looking at today is from The Police's 1983 record Ghost In The Machine
And it's called Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic. Let's get started. Okay. This song is really interesting on many levels
Tuning
The first thing is that
it's not tuned to standard tuning, so anybody that's ever tried to figure this out realizes that it's in-between G and A-flat
literally
fifty-cents sharp. What I think they did is, that they sped the tape up to get the
tempo a little bit faster. It probably didn't feel right at the tempo
Sped the tape up and said - that sounds great! It also makes the tune have a really unique
sound. Most people would not realize it, if they didn't have perfect pitch, but it does have a unique
sound that you can't really identify.
But that, I think, is because of this
Bassline
The other thing is that this is one of the only songs I can think of that has a Lydian bassline in the verse
- either in the verse, or the chorus -
I don't know any songs that really have a Lydian bassline that is this literal. So it begins on G or
G, in-between G and A-flat, and it comes right up the scale: G, A
B
C-sharp - and that's the verse - okay? It literally walks up 1, 2, 3, sharp, 4
Let's take a listen to the intro...
Okay, so the bass - here's Sting's bass...
He's playing a very compressed fretless bass
1, 2, 3, sharp 4
Okay? They also have a little hi-hat thing that I really want to talk about, here at the beginning...
What you notice when you hear this hi-hat is that there's a delay on the hi-hat
There's actually delay on the drums in the verses. There's a delay in the hi-hat so you can hear it right here
So by soloing the drums...
You can hear that little echo on the drums
Now, the guitars walk right up in the same way...
It's guitar with an after-swell...
Walks right up the Lydian scale...
And then, my favorite part - the keyboard part...
Okay, the keyboard part is really two different phrases. So it starts out...
And then, the first time, it goes...
Okay? The second time through the phrase it repeats the same thing, but the ending of the phrase is a little different
Right here, so check it out...
Let's talk about the melody now, so the range of the melody is basically from A,
Melody
above middle-C, up to F-sharp, the range of a sixth, then it starts out here
B...and...and I know this is a quarter-step, so it's kind of confusing here, but, ah...A, B
to D
and it goes D to C-sharp, C-sharp, D, F-sharp - in that range of a sixth - so from
And it uses a G Lydian scale
of the G Lydian mode, to go along with the chord progression
PreChorus
You notice that the melody bounces around between the fifth and the sharp-four, right?
Up to the major seventh of that Lydian mode, the G Lydian mode,
but the first phrase: In my heart...ends on the A
And it makes a nice sixth interval with that sharp-four there, which is why it's a great resting note
And of course that ends
up on the F-sharp
which is a great note because it works with the chord progression that happens right here in the pre-chorus
So this pre-chorus is really interesting because it really sets up the feel of the next section of the chorus. It...
Chorus
it goes from the slow-moving
really moody
ethereal Lydian sound of the verse and then it turns into a calypso tune, essentially
D, G, A, D - listen to the bass part on it
Listen over the keys...
with the keys in the build-up...then...
Okay, so let's talk about the chorus here. This is a
classic technique, where you have a break and you allow the chorus to come in
unaccompanied, okay, so you hit the...they hit the break here, the whole band...
And on: 'thing'
the whole band comes in. It really gives...when...when the beginning of the hook starts on a break
and then you power into the chorus, when you are all hitting together on an important word of the chorus, it gives it a lot...
So everytime, every...every downbeat there has an important word and the lyric
lands right on the downbeat. Let's talk about what the guitar does in the chorus, so the guitar then goes to this reggae
Chorus Breakdown
What we call a skank rhythm here
Sounds like he has an auto-wah on it
One, two, three, four - one, two, three, four - the skank happens in reggae on two and four
Okay, as we just saw in the guitar part, the chorus is simply going from A to D or five to one - check it out...
A, D, 4, 5, 1, 5, flat-6, B-flat
This is one of the most unique chord changes here, this is what makes Sting a genius as a writer. So you're hearing this...
and the last time to the flat-six. Once it goes to the flat-six, check out what the keyboard does...
Okay, so the keyboard goes from B-flat major
and then it drops down to
F-major. I'm doing my F at 9 over A, but the bass is playing F, so it's playing the root of the chord,
then it goes down to and
then it walks back into the G Lydian part. This is really unusual, so flat six
then...so you're going B-flat to
F-major over A
then you start the Lydian walk-up
So there's a complete change of mode there...back in the verse...
And that note - D...
Is...
works perfectly over all those chords. I mean, it's incredibly ingenious
So let's listen, then we go into the second verse and listen how the keyboard does its little turnaround here...
Really interesting - there's that little out-of-tune note that Sting sings on: 'met'. Here, listen...
He drifts flat there, and it really gives it a unique sound I think
Anybody that...ah...that knows the song notices that if you're a musician, but it's really...
it's cool. Yeah, and if I solo the keyboards and the guitar, check it out...
So the keyboards have gone into a high register...
And the guitar is simply doing a pattern
Like that - if you listen to the verse part, right? The guitar...
And the delay goes through there, then back to the skank, so the bridge actually
Bridge Breakdown
does something unusual again. It goes to the flat-six chord, like it does in the interlude
between the first chorus and the second verse. The bass is going between B-flat, and F, but check this out...
Listen to what the keyboard does here...
It's going between G and A, so it's going between G and A with this pattern, so it goes...
And then it's coming down this...
A Aeolian or A-natural minor sound there, so it's going from...
Check it out...
Then it moves into a new pattern that goes
between, ah...F, G, D, F, G, C, G - check it out...
So the building - the last chorus - goes between B-flat and C - check out the guitar part...
So it's going...
Come between those two chords, right? And then it rises here...
Then you have that filter sweep in the synthesizer and
They go up into D, to set up the last chorus
And then we have the: 'ee-ohs'
Then the chorus goes back to B-flat at the end, but it changes again - check it out...
Brings in this little...
Square-wave synth
D-major, B-flat, then G-minor
It goes to the flat-six chord, B-flat, but check it out...
F, G-minor, A-minor, B-flat and then F, C, D-major
modulation, then B-flat, F
G-minor, A-minor, B-flat
F, C, D - you can hear the key change...G-minor, A-minor, B-flat, F, C, D then he
goes to the 'ee-oho!' part here, with the harmony on it
And we have that little...duh-duh-duh-duh-duh-duh-duh...
Sequencer keyboard...keyboard sequencer part...and then...
The chorus ad-lib there, which is really powerful
Walk up, then...
goes to D there
And then one of the most unusual things
Then it gets back to the Lydian bassline
This is one of the few instances that I can think of that
radio stations when the tune came out would always play the tune to the end of the fade
Because there's new melodic material coming in, even on the...at the very end of the fade, that beautiful
recap of the verse melodies
With a different melody
That's right at the bottom of the fade, you hear that, and it's super-powerful
I...I remember when I first heard it
I would always turn up the car stereo when that happened, when it got to the end of that fade. Everybody would do that and
nowadays you think of a radio station...would always...would talk over those things, but that was really just
another part of the tune
It's...it's a reiteration of the verse, with a completely new melody right at the bottom of the fade
Really incredible thing.
Countermelody
There's a few production elements I want to talk about in here
One of them is the drum part - the space that Stewart Copeland leaves in his kick drum pattern in the chorus. He's got a very
sparse kick drum pattern
and it really opens up room for the bass to create this rhythmic movement. Check out the bass and drums in the chorus...
Another thing that's really interesting, is there's a slight change in the bass part in the second chorus
He changes the rhythm here - check this out...
Right here!
He infuses a...more of a reggae rhythm there
I think it's the only time it happens in the song
But it really grabs your ear and makes you wait for it. Arrangementally, another thing The Police were masters at
are hooklines that happen instrumentally in the track
There's this entire octave part that goes on at the end of the song, and it's...really, kind of takes over this part...
That's really the...
That's the main countermelody for the entire ending of the song. It's really effective
This is one of the most complex pop songs that I've ever heard. I believe if it came out today
it'd still be a massive hit
That's all for now! Please subscribe here to my Everything Music YouTube channel
And hit the notification button to let you know when a new video's coming out and when I'm going live. Thanks for watching!